Dude, ah, this dude is dangerous.
Dangerous. I start talking to Ross
Simmons before I even record a podcast
and like 45 minutes later like, "Oh
yeah, we have to record a podcast."
Inside SEO Week. I'm Garrett Susman.
Today I'm joined by none other than Ross
Simmons. He is the founder and CEO of
Foundation. He's also got this
incredible like jumping into SAS when it
comes to social sharing and creating
content called distribution.ai.
Really cool tool. I'm excited to dive in
because he's going to be speaking at SEO
week. What's going on, Ross? How you
doing, man?
>> What's going on, Garrett? I'm doing
well. Super excited to be coming back to
SEO Week. Uh, thrilled to be here.
Thanks for having me on. Let's dive in.
Let's uh let's jam.
>> Well, there's so much to talk about. So,
like start at the top. Start at the top.
Paradigms are shifting. Worlds are
colliding. AI search. What's top of mind
for you right now in AI search?
>> Top of mind right now for me is the
shift the shift in the SER every single
day. There's a lot of um a lot of moving
parts and we're seeing Google just
recently surpass Reddit. We're seeing
the rise of LinkedIn even more
frequently with B2B. We're seeing so
many changes um with local search with
Yelp showing up in like 62% of localized
searches. And that's not even my world.
But like I'm always just monitoring the
data. And what I'm seeing that I love is
I'm kind of being proven right from
things that I was saying back in 2018
when I was telling everyone that we
should be on Yelp, Facebook, Reddit,
Quora, LinkedIn, Reddit, all these
platforms and SEOs were saying, "Oh,
this isn't real SEO. Like, let's stick
to on-site optimization stuff." So,
that's kind of cool. But monitoring
those shifts has been very fascinating
to me. And I think there's um there's
going to continue to be shifts, but it's
becoming more and more obvious, I
believe, around what users want and how
the LLM, especially like Google AI mode,
etc. are like understanding and
interpreting what consumers want and
trust and then giving them back to them.
Now, here's the thing. Marketers pick up
on something like Reddit and then they
spam it to death and they start creating
a whole bunch of AI systems where every
time someone puts up a post in a certain
thread, they find a subtle way to plug
their tool and they're using a script
and claude to write it. And marketers
ruin a good thing. And I'm a marketer,
but I'm a Redditor first. And that
sucks. So, we're going through this like
wild time where it's kind of like I wish
marketers had to take a hypocratic oath,
but at the same time, there's so much
opportunity for marketers um on these
platforms and on these channels. So, um
long answer to a short question, but
essentially monitoring the trends and
staying up on it is just it's just fun.
This is a fun time to be in discovery,
>> dude. Pretty. I I love it. It I am with
you 100%. And it's got to be like as the
king of distribution, that's been your
messaging for so long. Like it's got to
be so validating. And to your point
about completely destroying every
strategy or tactic, it's like that is
SEO. It's all cat and mouse. It's like
come up with one thing, subvert here
until it doesn't work anymore, go
somewhere else.
>> So the next like 12 months, what do you
think SEO is even going to look like?
Like what direction do you think we're
going in?
>> I think there's going to be two camps. I
think there's going to be one camp of
SEOs who do the same thing that they
were doing last year and they'll keep
doing it. And then I think there's going
to be a camp that fully evolves from
thinking of SEO as a singular on-site
thing and starts to go into offsite. And
I know off-site has always been a part
of SEO, but it's becoming more and more
important. And you're starting to have
an influence on brand. You're having an
influence now on PR. You're having an
influence on social. You're getting into
rooms that SEO traditionally didn't. And
I think that there is a world where
we're going to have those two camps.
We're going to have a camp that hangs on
to the traditional role, the traditional
seats that we sat in as SEOs and
marketers. And then we're going to have
another group. And this group is what I
believe is going to lead the way as it
relates to discovery in the new age.
They're going to recognize that search
doesn't just happen on Big G on Google.
It happens on YouTube. Search also
happens if you're in consumer on
Instagram. It also happens on Tik Tok
and that people are going to these
platforms and they're asking questions
or looking for things. Millions of
dollars every minute is transacted upon
via search on Tik Tok. But for some
reason, marketers continue in the SEO
world to ignore it like it's this thing
that doesn't exist. What I believe the
future holds is more SEOs who think
holistically instead of singularly. And
the ones who think holistically will
absolutely dominate and win in their
markets.
>> I I love it because it really is so many
different channels, so many fractured.
They're all interconnected. The way that
we search is different. They're all
different algorithms. It makes our job
so complex. What are what are like the
problems or or the questions that that
you find yourself really most focused on
right now because of all this stuff?
Yeah, I think it's picking the channels
that are ripe for opportunity. And for
us, because at Foundation, we focus on
B2B brands, it's kind of easy for us to
stay in our lane of channels that B2B
decision makers make. So, as much as I'm
intrigued and would love to just like
geek out in my spare time to understand
what search on Tik Tok is like, what
search on Instagram is like, to even go
through a mental model of like, is there
any other platforms that I'm missing?
Like, is discovery on Snapchat a thing?
I have to stay in my lane of where B2B
brands are and become and empower my
team to have the tools and the resources
to be excellent there. So when it comes
to YouTube, we need to understand search
and discovery on YouTube. When it comes
to Google, when it comes to chat GPT,
Perplexity, Claw, even Reddit because
Reddit influences Google, we need to
ensure that our audience, our team is
equipped with the information they need
to be able to optimize for these
different platforms. I I think it's
really interesting. It's really hard to
do with so many new things coming up to
to stay focused. So, I commend you,
dude.
>> It is tough. It's impossible. Like I
it's um when you're early in your
career, I think like one of the one of
the beauties is that everything is out
there for you to learn. You have the
beauty of just like learning all of the
things and like there's no limit really
in terms of timeline. And we right now
as a industry I believe are in one of
the coolest times. And I think for a lot
of us try to just find time to just put
in the headphones, consume the patents,
read content, read materials from some
of the top minds in the world, go to
events like SEO week and learn from
people who have made the time to do it
and then apply that to your business, to
your career, and to your own future. Um,
it's an amazing time. It's a cool time
and I think uh people are going to look
back at right now and say those were the
good old days. Like look at what we were
able to come out of. It's uh it's cool
time.
>> I love it. Can you expand on that? Like
your core wheelhouse has always been
distribution, but you're a tinkerer.
You're an experimentter. How does that
show up? And I love that you mentioned
mental models. How does it show up in
your thinking?
>> Yeah, I'm a big experimentter. So, like
when I was a kid, I always was running
experiments trying to figure out how in
Nova Scotia worms were around in the
summer and also survived our winters,
but we had all kinds of snow. So, I put
worms in the freezer and my mom and dad
would get mad at me saying like, "What
in the world are you doing?" But like, I
would run experiments all the time. And
for me, the reason why I tinker and
experiment so much is just because I
love the idea of like unlocking new
insights about the world. Like to me the
the beauty of life is discovery and
learning. And every day in this
industry, you have an opportunity to
learn a little bit more about the
algorithms that influence buyers, a
little bit more about the consumers who
you're trying to connect with, the
people in the space who are providing
resources and information. And now with
AI, you have the ability to kind of
build things. So to me, I just love the
idea of experimenting, learning new
things, and kind of just going down this
path of like exploration. Um, every time
I log into the keyboard every day, like
let's learn something new.
>> It's f you and it's funny because we're
so in the SEO industry, we were always
historically looking for these blanket
recommendations of strategies and
tactics that that work for everybody,
and that's just not how it is anymore.
How like what experiments would you
recommend for B2Bs to start trying
themselves in AI search that you think
are really compelling?
>> I think one of the let so I'm also a big
believer in risk assessment. So there's
lowrisk high-risk experiments from a
lowrisk experiment that you can do. I
would look at the way that my site is
structured and just like throw up a
llms.txt file. It might cause no harm.
It'll cause no harm to do that. You can
go to claw chachi someone ask it to it.
Yes, there's some things that say it
does absolutely nothing. There's some
things that say it can do something.
Test it. Low risk experiment. What's the
harm? Let's give it a go. Let's see what
happens. Then there's more high-risk
things like, hey, let's go and create a
subreddit and start to seed content into
that subreddit that are rooted in high
intent queries associated with our brand
that might speak to competitors to
alternatives. and let's try to stir up a
conversation on this branded subreddit.
It's high risk because it takes time and
energy. It's high risk because you're
going onto the channel that's going to
tell you where to go and how to get
there very quickly. Um, that becomes a
riskier experiment. But what I would
encourage folks to do is like lean into
experiments. Like every year I would say
20 to 30% of things that you do as a
business as an SEO should be risky and
unknown and like a little bit out there
and then the rest can be steadystate
lowrisk activities but you need to take
a few bets because what those bets give
you is an advantage over everyone else.
Like if you're able to find traction
with a tactic, a strategy, and a
technique that no one else has tapped
into, one sh move in silence like
lasagna. Stop going on X and doing
screenshots and saying, "Hey, I just
tricked Google. Look at what I was able
to do." Just chill. Just allow your
revenue to go up. Allow your pipeline to
go up. Stop bragging for a second. brag
after the the dip goes comes back and
just like win like go win. That would be
my piece of advice. So I encourage folks
to experiment. Experiment regularly.
>> Find some small ones, find some big
ones. Make your bets.
>> I I love that too because it's like
everyone does have a a different
tolerance for risk, different timelines,
different runways. And so it's like, you
know, really locking into what is
potentially going to work with what
you're comfortable with. Like obviously
we both work with like enterprises and
individual like SAS startups or or small
businesses.
>> It's a it's a different conversation but
with AI search to your point about like
the LLMS.txt
it's like
>> nobody knows definitively right now.
People are saying things really
confidently and you know one day it's
Reddit on showing up as a citation
source the next day it's LinkedIn and
>> it's not necessarily definitely going to
always be like that.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Same with like the world
of YouTube. Like you can run some risk
now with just like okay if it if you're
in the scrappy stage of a business like
I'm not talking publicly traded
enterprise companies but I'm probably
running a test with AI generated videos
of the founder who is talking about like
glossery terms. So like think about
glossery terms as an SEO strategy we
used to talk about on site. You create a
ton of glossery terms, high value, high
quantity of content, defining relevant
terms that are relevant to your
audience. Top of funnel traffic would
sort
great for citations, by the way. But
then let's say you wanted to try
something new. You take all of those
definitions, but you created a YouTube
series where your your founder is
talking about every single definition
for like five to 10 minutes, all
optimized around what is queries. And
then you embed those YouTube videos
directly in the landing pages that you
already built. And it's all done with
Hey Jen and 11 Labs.
It's an experiment. I wouldn't do it if
I'm publicly traded, but I would do it
if I was a small scrappy startup trying
to win. Like, let's go test it out. See
what happens. And I'll tell you that
that's the dangerous thing with with SEO
week is like we get folks like you and
me and all these different speakers and
all these different attendees in a room
and you start coming up with like really
cool fun ideas to experiment with. You
were there last year. Tell me about your
experience last year and and real quick,
tell me what you're excited about for uh
2026.
>> So, the ideas that come out of SEO week
are gamechanging for businesses. Like, I
think the biggest thing that I'm looking
forward to, I don't go to a lot of
events and think, I can't wait to hear
whatever the other speakers have to say.
But when I go to SEO week, the speakers
deliver. like the speakers actually
bring ideas that they haven't already
shared before. They bring content and
stories that are from the trenches. Um
the the concepts are just valuable. And
I think for us, we go in with an open
mind to be like, okay, what can we learn
from the industry, but also when I'm
speaking, I'm like, what can I give back
to the industry in terms of value? How
can I give the community as much value
as they gave me? And um every single
time so far SEO week has delivered. Not
to mention that the venue was insane.
The people that come out are insane.
Like it's just an awesome energy vibe
with maximum levels of insight coming
from the speakers. So I'm looking
forward to it. It's going to be a good
time. And I already seen some of the
names that are speaking and it's like
the lineup is already hot. So I'm
excited to see who else rolls into the
the mix. But uh I can't wait. It's gonna
be a great event.
>> I I I will never forget last year like I
was up in the balcony at the algorithms
afterparty and I saw you and Crystal
Carter just like dancing to like while
Busta is ripping it
>> is like one of those moments man.
>> It was unreal. It was unreal. So topping
Buster is going to be tough but I'm sure
that the pole ran team can pull it off
if anybody can.
>> You know Michael do it. Okay. So there
you go. If you've never if you've never
heard Ross present and just had his
ideas percolate and infect your brain,
if you will, SEO week, uh, 2026, April
27th to the 30th in New York City, get
your tickets and hit us up. Oh, Ross, if
someone wants to find you online,
where's the best way to get to Oh,
you're difficult. People find you
everywhere. Where's the best place?
>> You can find me on all the channels, but
most importantly, I hope that you come
out to SEO week and say hello. That'd be
the best thing that you can do. But if
you can't, LinkedIn X, all the
platforms, but I'd rather see you at SEO
week.
>> There you go. We'll see you. Thanks,
Ross. Appreciate your time, man. Cheers.
>> Bye.